---
title: "Perceived Privacy: The Subjective Nature of Consumer Trust in the Digital Age"
author: "Axel Eschholz"
---

### Introduction:

Since the inception of the internet, privacy and trust have been at the center of socio-political concerns surrounding the technology. Given the unprecedented reach of the internet, putting personal information online inevitably provokes hesitation. The global zeitgeist is filled with stories of online identity fraud, data leaks, and hacks. In fact, this sentiment is so prevalent that it has been characterised and documented by both rigorous academic studies (Jibril et al., 2020) and popular films (Brancato & Ferris, 1995). As such, in the digital age, consumer trust when it comes to data privacy is of paramount importance when it comes to companies' ability to collect data. However, it is important to note the distinction between consumer trust in data privacy measures and the actual degree of privacy provided by said measures. The latter is all well and good, but the former is the metric by which users are retained, gained, and coerced into parting with their precious personal information. Considering the relative technical illiteracy of the average internet user when it comes to the specifics of data privacy and cybersecurity, the user must find other metrics by which to mark their degree of trust in any given website. Therefore, this paper will assert that consumer trust hinges more on purely aesthetic elements, emotional connections with brands, and the subjective lens through which individuals view and interpret data privacy, rather than the objective reality of implemented safeguards.

### Background & Definitions:

To effectively analyse this paradigm, one must first define the concept of digital privacy. Digital privacy refers to the level of control that individuals have over their digital footprint. This includes how personal information is collected and used, the right to be forgotten, and the protection of sensitive data (Martin & Murphy, 2017). From a corporate perspective, the implementation of data privacy boils down to monetization and security. Monetization, especially for many media companies, is either directly or tangentially linked to the collection, aggregation, and sale of user data (Najjar & Kettinger, 2013). In fact, as per \_The Economis_t, data has surpassed oil as the world's most valuable resource. Therefore, it stands to reason that the more data that can be collected, and the more specificity with which that data can be aggregated and sold, the more of an impact it has on the bottom line. Since this data is so valuable, it will inevitably become the target of all manner of online criminals, thus increasing the importance of security. If users are to trust a company with their data, they need to be assured that it is sufficiently protected from those that would steal and exploit it. Therefore, consumer trust is defined in this context by the level to which consumers are willing to give the corporate entity their data. This applies to both actively inputting personal information, as well as agreeing to provide passive usage data.

### Body:

In the case of the non-technical user, anything happening "under the hood" of a website or application might as well be sorcery. When the user is left to judge relative trustworthiness based on their interaction with the user interface, these purely aesthetic components can have a significant effect on consumer trust (Bhandari et al, 2019). Thus, there exists significant motivation for companies to focus on nonfunctional aesthetics, perhaps even in lieu of other data protection and privacy measures, to get more 'bang for their buck' in building consumer trust.

Another factor with influence over consumer trust is that of brand identity. In the digital space, brands assume personified identities to interact with their consumer base (Braxton & Lau-Gesk, 2020). The level of interaction and engagement generated by this identity can have a direct impact on consumer trust. And example of this impact can be found in a case study conducted by Ayaburi & Treku in 2020 on the relative efficacy of Facebook's apology for the 2016 Cambridge Analytica scandal. This study found that users' perceived behavioral integrity of Facebook increased trust in the application and associated applications, Instagram and WhatsApp in this case. Essentially this implies that users' existing subjective opinions on the relative integrity of an organization has a positive impact on consumer trust.

Finally, consumer trust is heavily influenced by the subjective lens through which individuals view and interpret data privacy. A 2022 privacy survey conducted by Cisco found that the most important activity an organization can do to build trust with its customers is to provide clear information on how their data is being used. Notably, this ranks significantly above refraining from selling information, complying with relevant privacy laws, and avoiding data breaches (Cisco, 2022). This suggests that consumers' trust is more influenced by the perception of transparency in an organization's data practices than by the objective reality of the safeguards implemented.

One could argue that, at some point, an egregious breach of trust could penetrate societal consciousness and incite recriminations against the offending entity. However, even in the case of such breaches, the reaction of the consumer is still governed in large part by subjective factors (Ayaburi & Treku, 2020). Another potential counterargument could reference the rising level of consumer technical literacy and their potential impact on how consumers evaluate their trust in an organization.

### Reflection:

As a computer scientist with an interest in digital privacy dynamics I fall into perhaps the most aware and technically literate consumer group in this paradigm. Yest despite my knowledge of what is going on behind the scenes, I still very much fall victim to the fallacies outlined above. I still make initial judgements about a website's trustworthiness based on unrelated factors like UI aesthetic and I am more willing to give companies I have a favourable impression of my data. Anecdotally, this could serve to bolster the claims made in this essay. That or it's simply an indication that I'm too laissez-faire with my data.

Where I can provide more robust insight is from my experience on 'the other side of the curtain' as a developer and architect of applications. In my experience, while apps are rarely designed with truly malicious intent, limited resources and time lead to a prioritization of whatever will have the greatest effect on the bottom line. Therefore, there is not only incentive to sell as much data as possible within the confines of legality, but also to leverage security theater to convince the user to part with said data. In short, I have witnessed the validity of the claim that consumers' trust is influenced more by subjective factors than the objective reality of data privacy practices.

### Conclusion:

In conclusion, consumer trust hinges more on emotional connections with brands, and the subjective lens through which individuals view and interpret data privacy, rather than the objective reality of implemented safeguards. Tt has been established that there is very little means through which the user can establish the objective reality of a company's data privacy practices or lack thereof. Moreover, the companies themselves have little incentive to implement robust data privacy out of the sheer altruism. Therefore, any real progress in the realm of data privacy must be facilitated by effective and enforceable legislation in the space. But given the speed of development in this context

### Works Cited

Ayaburi, E. W., & Treku, D. N. (2020). Effect of penitence on social media trust and privacy concerns: The case of Facebook. International Journal of Information Management, 50, 171-181. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.01](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.01)

Bhandari, U., Chang, K., & Neben, T. (2019). Understanding the impact of perceived visual aesthetics on user evaluations: An emotional perspective. _Information & management_, _56_(1), 85-93.

Brancato, J., & Ferris, M. (1995). _The net_. United States; Columbia Pictures.

Braxton, D., & Lau-Gesk, L. (2020). The impact of collective brand personification on happiness and brand loyalty. _European Journal of Marketing_, _54_(10), 2365-2386.

Jibril, A. B., Kwarteng, M. A., Nwaiwu, F., Appiah-Nimo, C., Pilik, M., & Chovancova, M. (2020, April). Online identity theft on consumer purchase intention: A mediating role of online security and privacy concern. In _Conference on E-Business, e-Services and e-Society_ (pp. 147-158). Cham: Springer International Publishing.

Martin, K. D., & Murphy, P. E. (2017). The role of data privacy in marketing. _Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science_, _45_, 135-155.

Najjar, M. S., & Kettinger, W. J. (2013). Data Monetization: Lessons from a Retailer's Journey. _MIS Quarterly Executive_, _12_(4).

The Economist (2017, May 6). The World's Most Valuable Resource Is No Longer Oil, but Data. The Economist. [https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-is-no-longer-oil-but-data](https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-is-no-longer-oil-but-data)

Wu, K. W., Huang, S. Y., Yen, D. C., & Popova, I. (2012). The effect of online privacy policy on consumer privacy concern and trust. Computers in human behavior, 28(3), 889-897. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.12.008)

Potential Sources:

[https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/doing_business/trust-center/docs/cisco-consumer-privacy-survey-2022.pdf?CCID=cc000160&DTID=esootr000515&OID=wprsc030156](https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/doing_business/trust-center/docs/cisco-consumer-privacy-survey-2022.pdf?CCID=cc000160&DTID=esootr000515&OID=wprsc030156)
